---
layout: post
title:  "Elixirizing our Rust"
subtitle: "(or) Elixirifying? Derustification?"
date:   2021-12-30 10:30:00 -0400
categories: elixir rust generative xairo
partno: 3
---

If you recall from the last post, we succeeded in our goal of generating some art. Or something resembling art, at least. A stepping stone on the way to art, let's say. We're not going to get any more artful in this post, but instead we'll be taking time to clean up what we've accomplished so far to provide a solid base to build a full library off of.

So, where did we leave off?

### The library as it stands

Right now we've got the `Xairo.Native` module that provides the function signatures we can map to our Rust NIFs:

```elixir
defmodule Xairo.Native do
  use Rustler, otp_app: :xairo, crate: "xairo"

  def new(_, _), do: :erlang.nif_error(:nif_not_loaded)
  def paint(_, _, _, _), do: :erlang.nif_error(:nif_not_loaded)
  def save(_, _), do: :erlang.nif_error(:nif_not_loaded)
end
```

Except for `new/2`, each of these functions takes as its first argument an Elixir `Reference` that maps to an in-memory Rust struct that holds the cairo `ImageSurface` and `Context` objects:

```rust
pub struct CairoWrapper {
  pub context: Context,
  pub surface: ImageSurface
}
```

Functions in Rust accept the reference and return it, allowing us, as we saw in the previous post, to chain functions together with the `|>` operator in a more Elixir-y way, but the fact remains that we're passing around a `Reference` struct which is, to put it mildly, useless, when it comes to understanding what that reference represents.

So let's create a struct that gives us some basic information about the image, along with storing the image's reference

### `Xairo.Image` to the rescue

```elixir
defmodule Xairo.Image do
  defstruct [:width, :height, :reference]

  def new(width, height) do
    reference = Xairo.Native.new(width, height)
    %__MODULE__{
      width: width,
      height: height,
      reference: reference
    }
  end
end
```

Ok, great, we've a struct that tells us, for now, about the width and height of our image, and provides the reference to the in-memory image so that we can pass that back to Rust. But, our NIFs expect a `Reference` to be given, and now we've got this `Xairo.Image` struct. But, the `Xairo.Image` struct has a `reference` field, so we can pass that to our `Xairo.Native` functions.[^1]

To do this, we'll need functions that take a `Xairo.Image` and arguments, extract the `reference` from the image, pass it and the other arguments to `Xairo.Native`, and return the full `Xairo.Image` struct so that we can continue using the `|>` operator. For a public-facing API, the root module `Xairo` seems like a good place for these functions to live.

```elixir
defmodule Xairo do
  def paint(%Xairo.Image{reference: reference} = image, red, green, blue) do
    Xairo.Native.paint(reference, red, green, blue)
    image
  end
end
```

For the sake of brevity we'll exclude the other functions, but this example should be enough to show the path we're starting down.

If we hop over into an IEx console, we can see that our previous example

```iex
iex(1)> Xairo.Native.new(100, 100) \
...(1)> |> Xairo.Native.paint(0.5, 0.0, 1.0) \
...(1)> |> Xairo.Native.save("test.png")
#Reference<0.3888755325.2009989122.47088>
```

can now be written

```iex
iex(1)> Xairo.Image.new(100, 100) \
...(1)> |> Xairo.paint(0.5, 0.0, 1.0) \
...(1)> |> Xairo.save("test.png")
%Xairo.Image{ ... }
```

It's not much to look at, but under the hood we've built the following framework with clear demarcations that gives us a base to expand on:

`Xairo` / `Xairo.Image` <--> `Xairo.Native` <--> `Rust`

The user calls functions from the `Xairo` or `Xairo.Image` modules, which are delegated to the `Xairo.Native` module, which provides the bridge to the Rust code. From there, the reference is passed back up the chain and finally returned as part of a `Xairo.Image` struct.

In the next posts we'll start looking at expanding our function palette to start drawing shapes on the image, as well as how to avoid some of the code duplication that's going to start showing up in the `Xairo` API functions.

Thanks for reading!

<hr style="border:1px solid #888888;margin-bottom:15px;"/>

#### Footnotes

[^1]: In theory we could create a Rust struct that maps to `Xairo.Image` and pass the struct itself back and forth, but this quickly becomes unwieldy when trying to sort out how to ensure that the native `cairo-rs` structs can be encoded/decoded safely. It's not impossible, but it is the decidedly harder of the two options. We'll see this put into practice a bit later on with some much simpler structs.
