---
layout: post
title:  "Refactoring `Xairo`"
subtitle: "(or) Another Day, Another Yak"
date:   2021-12-12 10:30:00 -0400
categories: elixir generative
---

If we look at our `Xairo` module from the end of the last post, we notice a
pattern emerging

```elixir
defmodule Xairo do
  ...
  def line_to(%Image{} = image, Point{} = point) do
    Xairo.Native.line_to(image.reference, point)
    image
  end

  def move_to(%Image{} = image, Point{} = point) do
    Xairo.Native.move_to(image.reference, point)
    image
  end

  def set_source_rgb(%Image{} = image, %RGB{} = rgb) do
    Xairo.Native.set_source_rgb(image.reference, rgb)
    image
  end

  def paint(%Image{} = image) do
    Xairo.Native.paint(image.reference)
    image
  end

  def stroke(%Image{} = image) do
    Xairo.Native.stroke(image.reference)
    image
  end
```

These functions can all be reduced to the form

```
def $name(image, other_args) do
  Xairo.native.$name(image.reference, other_args)
  image
end
```

Fortunately, Elixir gives us way to write code that will generate code: macros.

### The first rule of Macro Club is Don't Write Macros.[^1]

Now, usually, in my life, I'm a rule follower. So, fortunately for us, the
second rule of Macro Club is Write Macros If That Is the Only Way to
Encapsulate a Pattern. And I feel pretty strongly we've got a pattern here that
needs encapsulation.

This will not be a full tutorial on Elixir macros because A) I'm not an expert
on them, and B) we won't need to touch most of the really hairy things macros
can do as part of this work. But, if you're less familiar, I'll try to explain
the relevant pieces, and link here to the [official Elixir docs](https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/meta/macros.html)

Let's start building our macro.

```elixir
defmodule Xairo.ToNative do
  defmacro to_native(fn_name, args) do
  end
end
```

We use `defmacro` instead of `def` to define a macro. We need to define it in
its own module, rather than in the `Xairo` module, so that when we include it in
`Xairo`, it has already been compiled, so we can make use of its code generation.
Because macros update the Elixir AST when they are called, we can run into
issues at compile-time if we're trying to update the AST of the same module that
is defining the code that updates itself.

The next thing we do inside the macro definition is open a `quote` block.
`quote` takes the code written inside its `do` block and returns it as Elixir
AST, which is then interpolated at compile-time at the call site of the macro.

At first glance, implementing our function seems straightforward, maybe
something like this:

```elixir
defmacro to_native(fn_name, args) do
  quote do
    def #{name}(image, #{args}) do
      Xairo.native.#{name}(image.reference, #{args})
    end
  end
end
```

and this is actually pretty close, all told. But because we're generating AST,
and not a string, our normal string interpolation syntax `#{...}` won't really
work. But macro syntax provides a solution: `unquote`. Whereas `quote` renders
its contents as AST, `unquote` allows interpolating existing values into the
macro code.

Knowing this, we can get one step closer to a working macro

```elixir
defmacro to_native(fn_name, args) do
  quote do
    def unquote(name)(image, unquote(args)) do
      Xairo.native.unquote(name)(image.reference, unquote(args))
    end
  end
end
```

But there's one more piece we need. `unquote` only really works on scalar values,
but our `args` is a list. If we try to `unquote` a list, it interpolates the
list as a list, rather than the individual elements, which is what we want here
when passing them to the function.

This is what `unquote` gets us.

```elixir
x = [1,2,3]
quote do
  [4, 5, unquote(x), 6]
end
[4, 5, [1, 2, 3], 6]
```

whereas what we really want is `[4, 5, 1, 2, 3, 6]`.

Fortunately, this is a common desire when building macros, so Elixir gives us
the tool to handle it. `unquote_splicing`, rather than `unquote`, does exactly
what we need

```elixir
x = [1,2,3]
quote do
  [4, 5, unquote_splicing(x), 6]
end
[4, 5, 1, 2, 3, 6]
```

So armed with this knowledge, we have the final piece we need to create a
working macro. We set a default for `args` of an empty list so that we
can have as simple a definition as possible for functions that only take
the Image struct as an argument.

```elixir
defmacro to_native(fn_name, args \\ []) do
  quote do
    def unquote(name)(image, unquote_splicing(args)) do
      Xairo.native.unquote(name)(image.reference, unquote_splicing(args))
    end
  end
end
```

With this function in hand, we can rewrite our `Xairo` module like so:

```elixir
defmodule Xairo do
  import Xairo.ToNative

  to_native(:line_to, [point])

  to_native(:move_to, [point])

  to_native(:set_source_rgb, [rgb])

  to_native(:paint)

  to_native(:stroke)
end
```

We can add documentation to show usage for each of the functions, but even just
invoking the macro makes it clear what the helper does.

### What does the future hold?

In these posts I've tried to explain the early stages of development that went
into building the `Xairo` library. At this point I have outlined the primary
building blocks:

* the Rust syntax for writing NIFs
* how to send data from Elixir to those NIFs
* an extendable base for adding functionality

At this point, continuing this blog series could quickly lead to unnecessary
repetition. With a few exceptions, all `cairo` functions can be implemented
in the same way as we've already seen. If in my development I find any problems
that warrant closer attention, I will continue this series, but in the meantime,
I invite you to follow my progress at [Xairo on Github](https://github.com/mikowitz/xairo).

As always, thanks for reading!

<hr style="border:1px solid #888888;margin-bottom:15px;"/>

#### Footnotes

[^1]: Programming Clojure, 3rd Edition by Alex Miller, Stuart Halloway, Aaron Bedra

